# Series, seasonality, mean and dispersion {#sec-A1}

The values observed or simulated by a model, such as flow rates,
temperatures and rainfall, are generally represented in the form of a
time series. @fig-A1 shows the example of a series of daily maximum
temperatures recorded in 2019 at the Les Cèdres^[The Les Cèdres station (7014290) is operated by Quebec’s Ministère
    de l’Environnement, de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques,
    de la Faune et des Parcs (MELCCFP).] weather station,
located near Montréal. Temperatures, like many other weather variables,
exhibit significant variability and are often seasonal, as shown in the
figure.

These temperatures can be compared to historical temperatures using
various statistical indicators. The first of these indicators is the
mean, which defines an expected value around which the series
fluctuates. In @fig-A1, the mean daily maximum temperature is
estimated by averaging the daily values of the 108 years of the
station’s operation (1913-2019). It is represented by the blue line in
@fig-A1.

The second indicator measures the values’ dispersion around the mean.
There are several ways to quantify this, the best known being the
standard deviation, which is represented by the two dotted lines in the
figure. Thus, 71% of the daily maximum temperatures observed in 2019 are
within one standard deviation of the mean (i.e. between the two dotted
lines in @fig-A1). It can also be seen that the daily maximum
temperatures on certain days are sometimes much higher or lower than the
mean. This is the case for several days in early July, when temperatures
went above 30°C, and in January, when daily maximum temperatures were
close to -20°C. These values deviate from the mean by more than one
standard deviation.

![Series of daily maximum temperatures measured in 2019 at the
Les Cèdres weather station, located near Montréal. The daily mean
from 1913 to 2019 is represented by the blue line, and the intervals of
one standard deviation by the red dotted lines.](media/A1.png){#fig-A1}


