# What is an extreme {#sec-A2}

An extreme refers to a value that deviates very widely, for example by
several standard deviations, from the observed mean values. There is no
precise, universal definition of an extreme, but the term generally
refers to rare events or conditions of exceptional magnitude. To fully
understand the risks that these types of events pose, their frequency
and intensity must be estimated.

Extremes are generally estimated in two ways. The first is to identify
values above a certain threshold. Taking the example of @fig-A1, one
could choose to look only at the values above 31°C, the threshold beyond
which the public health impacts are considered significant.^[[Surveillance des impacts des vagues de chaleur extrême sur la santé au Québec à l’été 2018.](https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/surveillance-impacts-vagues-chaleur-extreme-sur-sante-quebec-l-ete-2018) Institut national de santé publique du Québec.] A statistical analysis known as the peaks-over-threshold (POT) method can
be used in this case^[See [Fact Sheet @sec-A7], which discusses the POT method. For further details see @csa2019e.].

The second approach, which is the most widely used, consists of
identifying the maximum values recorded during certain sub-periods—often
one year. This is known as the block maxima method. @fig-A2 shows the
series of maximum daily precipitation recorded each year at the Chelsea
station^[The Chelsea station (7031360) is operated by Quebec’s Ministère de
    l’Environnement, de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques,
    de la Faune et des Parcs (MELCCFP).] in the Outaouais region. The values exhibit a great deal of
interannual variability. Some years are distinguished by exceptional
maximum daily precipitation, such as 2011, when more than 140 mm of rain
was recorded on June 23. This extraordinary rainfall exceeded the values
recorded since 1930 by more than 40 mm! In fact, this event caused
several landslides in the Chelsea area.^[See [Glissements de terrain en Outaouais : des résidences sont évacuées](https://ici.radio-canada.ca/nouvelle/521729/glissement-terrain-outaouais).]

![Series of annual maxima of daily maximum precipitation at
the Chelsea weather station in the Outaouais region. Each point
corresponds to the maximum daily precipitation value recorded at that
station each year. Note that years with more than 20% of the daily data
missing are not included.
](media/A2.png){#fig-A2}
