# Extremes, non-stationarity and climate change {#sec-A3}

One of the major impacts of climate change is a change in the amplitude
and frequency of extreme weather conditions, including the
intensification of extreme precipitation.

Let’s return to the example in @fig-A2 to illustrate how climate
change manifests. Beyond the large interannual variability, annual
maximum precipitation appears to be increasing over time. The average
over the first 30 years (1928–1957) was 44 mm, while the average for the
last 30 years (1995–2024) was 61 mm (@fig-A3). Applying a statistical
test (the Mann-Kendall test at a 95% confidence interval; see [Fact Sheet
@sec-A6]) confirms the hypothesis of an upward trend at this station (p-value
\< 0.01). This means that the trend is statistically significant. The
estimated rate of change in extreme precipitation at the Chelsea station
is 3.5% per decade.^[The rate of change of the annual maximum precipitation was estimated using the Sen’s slope, also called the [Theil–Sen estimator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theil–Sen_estimator).] Such a series is said to be non-stationary.

The trend shown in @fig-A3 is representative of the trends sometimes
observed and generally simulated by climate models: a progressive
increase or decrease in the average. It implies that the probability of
observing an extreme value above certain thresholds increases over time.
Look at the series in @fig-A3 and consider the year 2000. The maximum
annual precipitation with a 20-year return period^[The return period is the average number of years between two consecutive years when this amount of rainfall occurred. The annual probability of exceedance (p) corresponding to a return period (T) is p = 1/T.] could be estimated
from the series available at that time (1928-2000), which was 71 mm.^[This value was obtained after fitting the Gumbel distribution to the
    data from 1928 to 2000 (see [Fact Sheet @sec-A7]).]
For the purposes of the example, imagine if this value were used in the
design of a structure with the capacity to evacuate the runoff from
71 mm of rainfall. The capacity is likely to be exceeded, with the
associated potential service disruptions, every 20 years on average.
This threshold might be considered reasonable, depending on the
designer’s risk tolerance. However, if we look at the values for the
period from 2001 to 2024, we see that its capacity would have been
exceeded nine years^[It’s assumed that the capacity is exceeded only once a year, but
    that doesn’t mean that it can’t be exceeded more than once in a
    given year.] during this period, while only four years with
exceedances occurred between 1928 and 2000. The risk during the
2001–2024 period goes well beyond what was initially established on the
basis of the “historical” series. This example shows the importance of
integrating climate change into designs.

![Series of annual daily precipitation maxima at the Chelsea
weather station. The horizontal dashes correspond to the means of the
periods 1928-1957 and 1995-2024, and the dotted line represents the
20-year return period rainfall calculated from values prior to 2000.
](media/A3.jpeg){#fig-A3}

