# Trend analysis {#sec-A6}

Climate change is manifested in the modification of the statistical
variables used to characterize the climate, the best known being the
mean (for example, the mean temperature or mean total precipitation). We
say that a series is non-stationary if these variables change over time
(see [Fact Sheet @sec-A3]). Climate change most often manifests itself as a
gradual increase in the mean, but other variations are possible, such as
an increase in variability.

Series of climate variables can be considered in the same way as random
series (see [Fact Sheet @sec-A5]). An infinite number of series are possible,
all with the same statistical characteristics (such as the same mean).
That means it’s realistic to randomly generate a series with a trend. In
order to assess whether a trend in a series is simply the result of
chance or, on the contrary, results from changes in the statistical
characteristics, a trend test is applied. Several trend tests have been
developed in the past, with the best known being the Mann-Kendall test.

The Mann-Kendall test is used to determine whether the detected trend is
statistically significant. For a series of n values
$\left\{ x_{1},x_{2},\ldots,x_{n} \right\}$, the Mann-Kendall test
allows us to verify the null hypothesis H~0~ that no monotonic trend is
present in the series; the alternative hypothesis H~1~ is that a
monotonic trend is present. The S statistic of the test is calculated as
follows:
$$S = \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} \sum_{j=i+1}^{n} \text{sgn} \left( x_{j} - x_{i} \right),$$
where
$$\text{sgn}\left( \phi \right) = \left\{ \begin{matrix}
 + 1 \text{ if } \phi > 0 \\
0 \text{ if }\phi = 0 \\
 - 1 \text{ if } \phi < 0 \\
\end{matrix} \right.\ $$

The S statistic is a count of the number of times pairs of values in the
series are increasing, equal, or decreasing. So the more increasing
pairs there are in the series, the more positive and larger S will be,
while the more decreasing pairs the series has, where $x_{i} > x_{j}$,
the more negative S will be. S = 0 corresponds to the case where there
is no net increase or decrease. Assuming that the values of the series
are independent and identically distributed, that S has a normal
distribution, that the mean of this distribution is zero and that there
is no equality ($x_{i} \neq x_{j}\forall i,j$), we can show that the
variance V is given by^[The expression for V(S) is different when there is equality between
    values of the series [@hamed2008].]:
$$V(S)= \frac{n (n-1)(2 n+5)}{18}$$

The $Z_{\text{MK}}$ statistic of the test is then calculated:

$$Z_{\text{MK}} = \left\{
\begin{matrix}
\frac{S-1}{\sqrt{V(S)}} & \text{if } S > 0 \\
0 & \text{if } S = 0 \\
\frac{S+1}{\sqrt{V(S)}} & \text{if } S < 0
\end{matrix}
\right.\ $$

A positive $Z_{\text{MK}}$ value suggests an upward trend, while a
negative value of $Z_{\text{MK}}$ is associated with a downward trend.

If $Z_{\text{MK}} > 0$, the null hypothesis H~0~ of no monotonic trend
is compared to the alternative hypothesis H~1~ of a monotonic increasing
trend. Thus, for a threshold α, we reject the H~0~ hypothesis in favour
of the hypothesis of an upward trend if
$Z_{\text{MK}} > Z_{\left( 1 - \alpha \right)}$, where
$Z_{\left( 1 - \alpha \right)}$ is the (1 - α)^th^ percentile of the
standard normal distribution^[But note that we can never accept H~0~ because we can never reject
    H~1~.].

If $Z_{\text{MK}} < 0$, the null hypothesis H~0~ of no monotonic trend
is compared to the alternative hypothesis H~1~ of a monotonic decreasing
trend. Thus, for a threshold α, we reject the hypothesis H~0~ in favour
of the hypothesis of a downward trend if
$Z_{\text{MK}} < - Z_{\left( 1 - \alpha \right)}$. For $\alpha = 0.05$,
where $Z_{\left( 1 - \alpha \right)} = 1.645$, we reject H~0~, knowing
that there is a 5% probability of this series being obtained if H~0~ is
true.^[There has been an ongoing debate for several years about the
    threshold α to be considered to reject the null hypothesis and about
    the interpretation of the significance threshold. Without going into
    details, if you are interested in these questions, consult @colquhoun2014.]
