# The peaks-over-threshold (POT) approach {#sec-A8}

The series of annual maxima only include the highest value recorded each
year. For example, consider the series of annual daily precipitation
maxima at the Jean-Lesage Airport^[The Jean-Lesage Airport station (7016294-701S001) is operated by
    Environment and Climate Change Canada.] station in Québec City, shown in
@fig-A7a. Since only one value is taken for each year, it is possible
that daily precipitations between the largest and smallest annual maxima
of the series were observed in certain years, but were not included for
analysis purposes. If we extract these values, we obtain the series in
@fig-A8. It can be seen that several relatively major rainfall events
are not included when only the annual maximum values are used, such as
in 2005 (the year when the highest value was recorded).

The peaks-over-threshold [@coles2001; @mailhot2013] (POT) approach allows these values to be
integrated into analyses. It consists of defining a threshold and taking
all the values above that threshold. The series of values above the
threshold is called the partial duration series. The generalized Pareto
distribution^[See @coles2001 for details on the generalized Pareto distribution.] is then fitted to this data and used to estimate
different extreme quantiles.

Identifying the threshold is tricky and is probably the main difficulty
of the POT method. Several approaches have been proposed for setting the
threshold, but the threshold remains arbitrary to some extent and its
choice influences the results (for a discussion of this point, see @coles2001). Although the use of the POT method can, in principle,
improve the inference of extreme quantiles, its implementation in
practice requires some expertise.

Implementing the POT approach also requires having historical data
archives with short time steps (e.g. 5-minute or hourly series) in order
to be able to extract values above given thresholds. Only annual maximum
rainfall of various durations is available in the historical data
archives in Canada, making it impossible to extract values above a given
threshold. For that reason, the POT approach cannot be used to build
Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curves. The use of the POT method
could prove advantageous in cases where continuous rainfall series are
available.

![Daily precipitation values at the Jean-Lesage Airport
station above the threshold value of 25.2 mm (smallest annual maximum in
the series shown in @fig-A7a) in each year.](media/A8.png){#fig-A8}

