# Assessing climate risks {#sec-B3}

The aim of this step is to refine the previous analyses in order to
identify and prioritize the hazard-system-impact sequences with the
greatest risks, which will be used in subsequent analyses. A system or
its components are at risk if they are exposed and vulnerable to a
hazard. Risk assessment involves three steps: (1) risk identification;
(2) risk analysis; (3) risk evaluation.

## Risk identification

The goal of risk identification is to precisely identify and evaluate
the risks associated with each hazard-system-impact combination based on
climate information, vulnerabilities and potential consequences in
current and future climates. This step is divided into three sub-steps.

A.  **Identification of systems and components**: done by reviewing the
    lists of potential impacts for each hazard-system
    combination^[Appendix B of @ouranos2024 provides a more complete
    list of possible hazards with their potential impacts on different
    systems.] and assessing whether each of these hazards
    can affect each system, thereby identifying the hazard-system pairs
    to consider in the next steps. At this stage, the impacts identified
    remain generic and need to be contextualized as part of the risk
    analysis.

B.  **Vulnerability analysis**: aims to determine the propensity or
    predisposition of a system to be negatively affected. This is an
    optional step, but performing the vulnerability analysis can be very
    useful in determining the consequences during the risk analysis
    ([-@sec-risk-analysis]). An example of a vulnerability analysis is given in [Fact
    Sheet @sec-B6].

C.  **Exposure analysis**: allows you to establish whether the system is
    actually exposed to each hazard. A system could theoretically be
    impacted by the hazard, but may not be exposed to it in the specific
    context being considered, in which case it would not be included. At
    first, this analysis can simply be limited to determining whether
    the element is or is not exposed (a yes/no type of analysis). The
    list of systems at risk in past and future climates can be
    established in this way.

## Risk analysis {#sec-risk-analysis}

A risk analysis involves assigning a risk level to each hazard-system
combination. The risk level (R) is defined as the product of the
likelihood of the hazard (L) and its consequences (C) on the system or
its components, written as $R = L C$ ([Fact Sheet @sec-B5]). A risk matrix is
created for each hazard-system combination by considering all the
impacts of this hazard on this system. The climate thresholds identified
in the previous step ([Fact Sheet @sec-B2]) can be used to assess the risks
associated with exceeding these thresholds. Several thresholds may also
be considered in order to assess the risks of hazards of different
magnitudes.

## Risk evaluation

The values obtained during the risk analysis make it possible to
establish a risk level and to identify and prioritize the components or
systems most at risk from a given hazard. The hazard-system combinations
involving major and extreme risks must be prioritized (see [Fact Sheet
@sec-B5]). Once this analysis has been carried out for each hazard-system
combination, that provides a risk evaluation based on two future
horizons and at least two SSPs. Generally, the risks will be greater the
further away the future horizon is and the greater the {{< glossary "radiative
forcing" >}}. @tbl-B3 presents an example summary of the results of the
risk assessment step for different hazard-system-impact combinations.
This table shows that floods caused by extreme rainfall pose the
greatest risks for the time horizon 2071--2100.

+------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+
| Hazard-system-impact                                                   | Reference period | 2041--2070                | 2071--2100                |
+:=======================================================================+:=================+:============+:============+:============+:============+
|                                                                        |                  | SSP2-4.5    | SSP3-7.0    | SSP2-4.5    | SSP3-7.0    |
+========================================================================+==================+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Damage to buildings from sewer backups caused by extreme rainfall      | Moderate         | Moderate    | Major       | Major       | Extreme     |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Mortality and morbidity in the elderly population following heat waves | Negligible       | Minor       | Minor       | Minor       | Major       |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Road surface degradation caused by freeze-thaw cycles                  | Minor            | Minor       | Major       | Major       | Major       |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

: Example of a risk assessment summary for different hazard-system-impact combinations (inspired by @ouranos2024). {#tbl-B3 tbl-colwidths="[44,10,16,12,16,12]"}


