# Climate risk management {#sec-B4}

The aim of climate risk management is to plan for the implementation of
adaptation measures. It involves the following steps: (1) identification
of the specific adaptation objectives; (2) identification and selection
of adaptation measures; (3) development of monitoring indicators; and
(4) planning for the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
adaptation measures.

## Identification of specific adaptation objectives

Specific adaptation objectives serve to establish the targets to be
achieved and the deadlines to be met for the risk reduction and
adaptation. These specific objectives structure the adaptation effort
and provide guidance on the type of measures to be implemented. They
also serve as a “dashboard” and guide for coordinating and mobilizing
stakeholders. This step is an opportunity to take a critical look at the
results of the risk analysis in order to modulate the adaptation
strategy in accordance with the issues. Thus, for a situation with
safety issues or possible loss of life and a long-term adaptation time
window, it may be appropriate to be more conservative and consider the
SSP5-8.5 scenario and a longer-term time horizon in establishing
adaptation objectives, in the aim of minimizing risks and maximizing
resilience. For more moderate risks, progressive adaptation based on the
SSP3-7.0 scenario could be considered, accompanied by adaptation
measures that can be adjusted over time. The adaptation objectives and
the strategy for implementing the adaptation approach depend on several
factors, including risk tolerance, available resources, the time window
available to implement the measures, and the target risk levels of the
adaptation.

## Identification and selection of adaptation measures

An inventory of potential adaptation measures can be generated initially
without considering the specific constraints on their implementation
(costs, technical feasibility, social acceptability, etc.). Several
general guides and lists of these measures are available^[Appendix I of @ouranos2024 provides a list of measures
    for different climate risks.].
The selection of measures should be based on criteria related to the
risk (e.g. risk reduction capacity, useful life of the system,
socio-economic and environmental consequences of the measures) and the
technical, operational and financial aspects (e.g. technical
feasibility, implementation and maintenance costs, availability of
funding, and the ability to obtain approvals for funding, planning,
implementation and monitoring). Selecting measures based on more
structured prioritization methods should also be considered^[Appendix J of @ouranos2024 presents three
    prioritization methods: multi-criteria analysis, scenario analysis
    and cost-benefit analysis.].
It should be noted that measures that are labelled as “adaptation
measures” are often ones that are already known and documented. For
example, green infrastructure is often mentioned as a climate change
adaptation measure for stormwater management. But it’s also recognized
as a best practice since it has several complementary advantages.

## Development of monitoring indicators

Developing monitoring indicators is essential, though difficult. Three
types of indicators must be defined to cover different aspects of the
adaptation process: (a) monitoring of specific objectives and climate
risk reduction; (b) monitoring of the progress of the timetable for
implementing measures; and (c) the effectiveness and performance of the
adaptation measures implemented. These indicators must be clear, simple
to estimate and interpret, linked to measurable targets, and accompanied
by a timetable indicating when they will be estimated. Table B.4
presents examples of indicators.

## Implementation, monitoring and evaluation of adaptation measures

The selected adaptation measures should be organized into a planning
schedule. This timetable must be established based on the risks that are
deemed to be a priority (see Fact Sheet B.3), but also based on factors
such as financing opportunities or the stakeholders’ willingness to act.
Several pieces of information will need to be compiled in order to plan
and monitor the selected measures that are required to estimate the
chosen indicators. This information will be used to obtain an overall
view of the roles and responsibilities of the different parties
involved, as well as the progress of the implementation of the measures
and their effectiveness. Monitoring and evaluating the adaptation
program is a difficult exercise that requires significant time and
effort and is often neglected.

+-----------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Indicators                                          | Metric Evaluated                                              |
+:====================================================+:==============================================================+
| Percentage of adaptation measures identified and    | Enables monitoring of the progress of the implementation of   |
| implemented                                         | the adaptation process                                        |
+-----------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Total of impermeable surfaces rendered permeable or | Enables the assessment of the volume of water not conveyed to |
| where water is redirected to infiltration zones     | the system, thereby helping reduce the risks associated with  |
|                                                     | urban flooding and overflows                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Number of deaths attributable to extreme heat       | Enables the assessment of the effectiveness of the adaptation |
| episodes                                            | measures taken to counter the risks associated with heat      |
|                                                     | waves                                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+

: Examples of indicators for monitoring the implementation of measures. {#tbl-B4}
