# The concept of risk and risk matrices {#sec-B5}

Consider a {{< glossary system >}} (infrastructure, population, ecosystem, etc.)
undergoing impacts (or consequences\*) like damage, mortality,
disruptions, service interruptions, etc., when exposed to a {{< glossary hazard >}}
(heat wave, flood, etc.). The magnitude and extent of the consequences
will depend on how extreme the hazard is. Thus, a minor flood, which
occurs more frequently, will affect a smaller area with lower flood
depths and less significant damage, while a flood of greater magnitude,
occurring more rarely, will have more significant consequences. So there
is a link between the amplitude, the extreme nature of the hazard, and
the scale of the consequences.

The concept of risk makes it possible to balance the {{< glossary likelihood >}} of a
hazard against the magnitude of the consequences on a system exposed to
this hazard. The risk (R) is expressed as the product of the likelihood
(L) and the consequences (C):
$$
R = L \times C
$$
Thus, a system exposed to a hazard will be more at risk (R ↗) the more
the hazard is probable (L ↗) and the more the consequences are
significant (C ↗). The likelihood refers to the probability that a
hazard will occur in a given area. It can be qualitative (unlikely,
likely, very likely, etc.) or quantitative, in the form of a probability
of occurrence. In the latter case, this value can be estimated from a
statistical analysis of historical data and expressed as an annual
probability of occurrence or as a return period (see [fact sheets @sec-A3] and
-@sec-A5).

A risk matrix is used to evaluate risks. The likelihood of the hazard
and its consequences on a given system are classified into various
categories. @tbl-B5 shows an example of a risk matrix with five
categories for likelihood (from “very unlikely” to “almost certain”) and
consequences (from “negligible” to “severe”). The placement of risks
into categories remains largely subjective, particularly for
consequences that can have several dimensions (material damage, loss of
use, mortality, degradation of habitats, etc.).

The risk is calculated by multiplying the likelihood and consequence
categories (@tbl-B5). So if a “very likely” hazard (category 4) leads
to “major” consequences (category 4), the associated risk is 16 (4 x 4)
and it is qualified as “major.” According to the classification in Table
B.5, the risk can range from “negligible” to “extreme.” The risk
therefore increases as we move from the lower left corner to the upper
right corner of the risk matrix.

Other classifications of likelihood, consequences and risk are possible.
The members of the committee responsible for the adaptation process must
agree amongst themselves on the classification to be used. Holding a
workshop to reflect on the subject, and consulting with experts (climate
science, climate change adaptation, regional planning, civil protection,
etc.) should be considered. Although the classifications are subjective,
it is essential for them to be understood and accepted by all. However,
too many or too few classifications should be avoided.


::: {#tbl-B5}
<table class="risk-matrix table">
<thead>
    <tr class="header">
        <td colspan="3" rowspan="3"></td>
        <th colspan="5" >Likelihood</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">1</th>
        <th class="header">2</th>
        <th class="header">3</th>
        <th class="header">4</th>
        <th class="header">5</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">Very unlikely</th>
        <th class="header">Unlikely</th>
        <th class="header">Likely</th>
        <th class="header">Very likely</th>
        <th class="header">Almost certain</th>
    </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="5" class="rotate-text">Consequence</th>
        <th class="header">5</th>
        <td>Severe</td>
        <td class="moderate">5</td>
        <td class="major">10</td>
        <td class="major">15</td>
        <td class="extreme">20</td>
        <td class="extreme">25</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">4</th>
        <td>Major</td>
        <td class="minor">4</td>
        <td class="moderate">8</td>
        <td class="major">12</td>
        <td class="major">16</td>
        <td class="extreme">20</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">3</th>
        <td>Moderate</td>
        <td class="minor">3</td>
        <td class="moderate">6</td>
        <td class="moderate">9</td>
        <td class="major">12</td>
        <td class="major">15</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">2</th>
        <td>Minor</td>
        <td class="negligible">2</td>
        <td class="minor">4</td>
        <td class="moderate">6</td>
        <td class="moderate">8</td>
        <td class="major">10</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th class="header">1</th>
        <td>Negligible</td>
        <td class="negligible">1</td>
        <td class="negligible">2</td>
        <td class="minor">3</td>
        <td class="minor">4</td>
        <td class="moderate">5</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th colspan="3" class="header">Risk level</th>
        <td class="negligible">Negligible<br>R ≤ 2</td>
        <td class="minor">Minor<br>2 < R ≤ 4</td>
        <td class="moderate">Moderate<br>4 < R ≤ 9</td>
        <td class="major">Major<br>9 < R ≤ 16</td>
        <td class="extreme">Extreme<br>16 < R</td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Five-level risk matrix integrating likelihood and consequences (adapted from @ouranos2024).
:::

