# Example of an adaptation process for pluvial floods {#sec-B6}

This fact sheet describes an example of a municipality’s adaptation
process for the risk of pluvial (stormwater) flooding. The steps
described in [fact sheets @sec-B2] to -@sec-B4 are repeated in the following
paragraphs. For further details and other application examples, readers
can consult @ouranos2024, as well as the
accompanying workbooks^[Workbook 1 – Method for carrying out a climate risk assessment;
    Workbook 2 – Method for carrying out a climate risk assessment
    (fictitious example); Workbook 3 – Planning the implementation of
    measures; Workbook 4 – Planning the monitoring of measures. Please
    note that the example in the fact sheet is different from the one in
    Workbook 2.]. The following example
is purely fictitious. Implementing an adaptation process requires human
and financial resources that can be significant. That means it will have
to be adjusted in accordance with the resources available. It is not
necessarily possible to transpose the following example to all
municipalities. The procedure used to estimate future rainfall
intensities that is presented in @tbl-B6b is described in Chapter 7 of
@mailhot2024.

## Objectives, scope and context of the adaptation process

The objective is to determine whether the intensification of extreme
rainfall in a future climate will lead to an increase in the risks of
pluvial flooding in certain areas of the municipality under study and,
if necessary, to identify adaptation measures and develop a plan for
implementing them in order to keep the long-term risks steady or bring
them down to levels that are deemed acceptable.

## Portrait of the organization and the territory under its jurisdiction

The municipality is located in the Québec City region. It offers the
normal services and has the usual powers of a Quebec municipality. In
particular, it is responsible for managing the stormwater collection
system and the collection and treatment of wastewater. Part of its
territory has separate systems for stormwater and sewage, and another
part has a combined system. There are several overflow structures, some
of which handle overflows at a high frequency. The receiving environment
is considered vulnerable. An inventory of the systems and
infrastructure, along with their characteristics (technical,
maintenance, etc.), as well as a review of the budgets,
responsibilities, regulations and jurisdictions in terms of stormwater
management must be carried out.

## Identification of hazards, systems and impacts

The hazard considered, pluvial flooding, is itself linked to the
hazard of extreme rainfall. However, according to the available climate
projections, this type of rainfall event is expected to increase in
frequency and intensity in the future. The systems involved are
stormwater management infrastructure and land use and development
(permeable and impermeable surfaces, water storage infrastructure,
pondage areas, basins, etc.), which determine the volumes of water
stored on the surface, infiltrated and running off into the system, as
well as the areas that are likely to be flooded.

A brainstorming session was organized to identify the systems and
components likely to be affected by this hazard. Four sectors of the
municipality, A, B, C and D, were identified as being at risk further to
this exercise. This evaluation was based on past experiences and on a
risk assessment by water management system managers. These sectors are
shown in @tbl-B6a. Note that sector D was included even though it has
not been flooded in the past, since the consequences of flooding in this
sector would be dramatic. Other sectors may also be included for similar
reasons. Risk evaluation in these cases involves ensuring that future
patterns of extreme rainfall will not lead to an undue increase in flood
risk for these areas.

The **hourly rainfall with a 25-year return period** was chosen as the
index and climate threshold for sectors A, B and C. The corresponding
value for the reference period was **40.2 mm in one hour**. That value,
which was proposed by the system managers based on their past
experience, defines the threshold beyond which rain is likely to cause
sewer backups and significant disruptions in these sectors^[Other indices of the same type are also possible. The choice of
    index depends on local configurations and must be determined after
    discussion with stakeholders in the field. It is approximate, but is
    still useful in the adaptation process. The effective duration of
    this 40.2 mm rainfall will have major impacts; the shorter the
    duration, the greater the impacts. Hydrological/hydraulic modelling
    of the sector (surface and sewer systems) could also be used to
    establish a link between future changes in extreme rainfall and
    flood risks. However, implementing such a model requires significant
    resources that are not available to all municipalities.].
The **hourly rainfall with a 100-year return period** was considered for
sector D, since the managers believed that pluvial flooding is possible
beyond that threshold and that it would have significant consequences
for this sector. The corresponding value for the reference period was
**49.7 mm in one hour**.

@tbl-B6b shows the values of these indices for the reference period
and for the medium-term (2041--2070) and long-term (2071--2100) future
horizons based on SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5^[SSP5-8.5 may be considered for certain critical infrastructure
    located in very vulnerable sectors with a useful life extending
    until 2100. The corresponding increases will be very high, however.]. The
annual probabilities of occurrence of 40.2 mm rainfall or more in one
hour for sectors A, B and C and of 49.7 mm in one hour for sector D for
the different future horizons are also indicated. For example, the
annual probability of having rainfall of 40.2 mm or more in one hour is
0.14 for the period 2071--2100 under SSP3-7.0, which means that during
this period, such an event will be recorded on average every 7 years,
while it occurred on average every 25 years during the reference period.
The increases in the intensities and probabilities of occurrence of the
extreme rainfall reported in @tbl-B6b are major. These probabilities
will be used to establish the likelihood scales (@tbl-B6g). The
impacts of possible pluvial flooding for the different sectors are
listed in @tbl-B6c.

## Assessing climate risks

This step ([Fact Sheet @sec-B3]) begins with the identification of the risks
associated with each hazard-system-impact combination based on climate
information, vulnerabilities, and potential consequences in the current
and future climates.

An exposure analysis is carried out first, using the climate thresholds
in @tbl-B6b. Preliminary evaluations have established that exceeding
these thresholds would result in several elements of these four sectors
being exposed. The list of the exposed elements, as well as their level
of exposure, will depend on the climate threshold set; a higher
threshold results in a greater number of exposed elements and a higher
level of exposure. The climate threshold must be set so that breaching
it will have significant consequences. Some sectors could be subdivided
and different climate thresholds considered for these subsectors.
Several climate thresholds could also be considered in the event that
exceeding these thresholds would mark a significant increase in the
levels of consequences and risks. The risk assessment consists of
determining how much more often the threshold(s) will be exceeded in a
future climate.

In this case, with the reference of a 1-hour rainfall of 40.2 mm or
more, or 49.7 mm or more, depending on the sector, the exposed elements
and the vulnerability levels of each of the exposed elements are
evaluated. A list of the exposed elements is then drawn up and a
vulnerability rating assigned to each sector.

The vulnerability is estimated by combining {{< glossary sensitivity >}} and {{< glossary "adaptive
capacity" >}}. The most vulnerable elements are those with high sensitivity
and low adaptive capacity. The allocation of ratings to each sector is
based on a series of criteria to be defined by the committee responsible
for the adaptation process. Table B.6d provides a possible list of these
criteria. Many are based on a review of past floods or on the expertise
and experience of either the personnel in charge of these systems or
people who intervene in the event of emergencies (engineers, managers,
blue-collar workers, emergency services, public health professionals,
etc.).

The sensitivity and adaptive capacity ratings are then assigned by the
members of the committee responsible for the adaptation process.
External experts may be consulted if necessary. These scores are then
used to establish the vulnerability score (VU), which is obtained by
taking the product of the sensitivity (S) and adaptive capacity scores
(VU = S x AC). Vulnerability scores can be assigned directly without
breaking them down into sensitivity and adaptive capacity scores, using
the criteria in @tbl-B6d.

@tbl-B6e shows the vulnerability assessment grid for the example
considered. It should be noted that previous preliminary analyses had
already identified these sectors as being exposed and vulnerable. Note
that the highest vulnerability rating was assigned to sector B, followed
by sector C. A “moderate” vulnerability rating was assigned to sector A,
while sector D has a “low” vulnerability rating. These ratings are
explained as follows:


  - Sector A had already been exposed to flooding and had certain
    characteristics that made it vulnerable to this hazard (e.g.
    negative-slope driveways, finished basements); however, the
    residents of this sector are socio-economically better equipped to
    deal with disasters and the adaptive capacity is considered high
    (moderate vulnerability rating).

  - Sector B had already been heavily exposed in the past and has a
    very vulnerable community that is socio-economically poorly
    equipped for adaptation (high vulnerability rating).

  - Sector C is critical for mobility (e.g. emergency services) and
    was already problematic; improvement work was already planned for
    this sector, so the adaptive capacity is considered high (moderate
    vulnerability rating).

  - Sector D had not experienced flooding in the past; however, the
    consequences of a flood could be catastrophic in the event of an
    increase in extreme rainfall, hence its “high” sensitivity rating.
    For this sector, it was important to assess the risk in a future
    climate following an increase in the probability of flooding
    occurring in this sector (high vulnerability rating).

The risk analysis is then carried out. It consists of estimating the
level of risk of each exposed system and component, for all of the
climate hazards, time horizons and radiative forcing scenarios selected.
First, it involves estimating the likelihood of the flood hazard and the
consequences of this hazard for each of the sectors identified as
vulnerable or potentially vulnerable. A risk matrix similar to the one
in Fact Sheet B.5 is used, where likelihood and consequences are divided
into five levels.

The likelihood ratings are set based on the values of the climate index
“maximum annual rainfall in 1 hour”, shown in @tbl-B6b. It can be
seen that the projected increases are greater for more distant future
horizons and for more significant radiative forcing scenarios. The
likelihood scale was established on the basis of the annual occurrence
probabilities for 1 hour of rainfall with a 25-year and 100-year return
period in the reference period (@tbl-B6g).

The consequence ratings are established by the committee members on the
basis of the vulnerability analyses shown in @tbl-B6e. They represent
the severity of the damage, disruption and other consequences if the
threshold is exceeded. As they are largely subjective, they must be
discussed and adopted by consensus among the committee members.

An important point to remember is that if the probability of crossing
the threshold is greater in a future climate, the average intensity of
the hazard crossing this threshold will be greater. In this case, it may
be useful to consider several thresholds in order to better calibrate
the progressive evolution of the consequences. Thus, if the magnitude of
the sewer backups and the area exposed to flooding increases
significantly when a second threshold is crossed, then it might be wise
to add this new threshold into the analysis in order to better
understand how the consequences and risks change for more extreme
hazards. For example, previous analyses indicated that the maximum
1-hour rainfall with a 100-year return period in the reference period
would occur every 12-13 years by 2071--2100, under SSP5-8.5. The
corollary of this assertion is that rainfalls of an intensity well above
the historical threshold will be possible in the future, with even more
devastating consequences. An analysis of the risks associated with these
more extreme events could be beneficial.

The sectors’ risk matrices are then constructed ([Fact Sheet @sec-B3]). @tbl-B6h
and -@tbl-B6i present these risk matrices for the periods 2041--2070 and
2071--2100 respectively, based on the three SSPs considered. An
examination of these matrices shows that sectors B and D will be at
major risk by 2041--2070 (risk scores of 12 and 10 respectively) under
SSP3-7.0. Sector A is added when the 2071--2100 horizon is considered.
The situation becomes much more critical under SSP5-8.5, since sectors
A, C and D are at major risk and sector B is at extreme risk by
2041--2070. Sector D goes from major risk by 2041--2070 to extreme risk by
2071--2100, under the same SSP.

The consequence scores in the risk matrix are intentionally unchanged
between the baseline period and the future horizons. In this way, the
impact of the hazards’ change in frequency on the risk is analyzed.
Considering the projected intensification of extreme rainfall,
unprecedented rainfall events that will far exceed historical values are
likely to occur. Thus, not only will the climate threshold be exceeded
more often, but it will be exceeded by a greater amount and the
consequences will be even more significant than in previous events. In
order to take this aspect into account, several climate thresholds
associated with higher consequence ratings can be defined. Different
scenarios looking at the consequences of lack of maintenance or
underinvestment in infrastructure, or an increase in the vulnerability
of certain populations, can be explored.

A broader review of the other sectors of this municipality should
probably be undertaken in light of these results, since even areas that
were historically protected from flooding could very well become exposed
to this hazard and suffer its repercussions.

Based on the results of the risk analysis, sectors B and D should be
prioritized, since they are most at risk in the 2041--2070 and 2171--2100
time horizons under both SSP3-7.0 and SSP5-8.5.

## Risk management

The main goal of climate risk management is to define specific
adaptation objectives, identify and select adaptation measures, plan
their implementation, and develop monitoring indicators.

To identify the appropriate adaptation measures for each sector, a
broad-based list is made of the possible types of measures along with
the suitability and feasibility criteria to be considered for their
implementation. @tbl-B6j shows an example of such a list and the
criteria. @tbl-B6j also highlights some important factors to consider.
This analysis requires the municipality to collect a significant amount
of information on the infrastructure in place, the known failures, the
planning of future work and the projected development of the sectors.
The best possible diagnosis of the state of the system and of critical
structures and sites is key. This information is essential to get an
overview of the adaptation options that are possible for each of the
sectors, even if it is a broad one. Lastly, based on these criteria, the
sectors where these measures could be implemented are identified (@tbl-B6k).

+--------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Sector | Features                                          | Flood history                                     |
+:=======+:==================================================+:==================================================+
| A      | Separated system, medium density residential,     | Several basements flooded during heavy rain       |
|        | several negative-slope driveways, moderate to     |                                                   |
|        | high level of impermeable surfaces, some green    |                                                   |
|        | spaces                                            |                                                   |
+--------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| B      | Combined system, apartments, heavily urbanized    | Heavy accumulation of surface water in some       |
|        | and impermeable, flat with several low points,    | places during medium-intensity rainfall events,   |
|        | several apartments in basements, heat island      | flooding of basement apartments due to sewer      |
|        | problems                                          | backups following heavy rainfall                  |
+--------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| C      | Low points located in underpasses or on major     | Several episodes with significant water           |
|        | traffic routes                                    | accumulation at certain low points                |
+--------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| D      | Sector with several critical buildings and key    | Although there have been no flood episodes in     |
|        | infrastructure (e.g. hospitals, long-term care    | the past, the consequences of flooding would be   |
|        | facilities) and several vulnerable populations    | dramatic for this sector.                         |
+--------+---------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

: Problematic or potentially problematic sectors. {#tbl-B6a}

+------------------+---------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Radiative        | Period              | Sectors A, B, C                                                          | Sector D                                                                 |
| forcing          |                     +------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|                  |                     | Intensity (mm/h) | Annual probability of occurrence of 40.2 mm of rain   | Intensity (mm/h) | Annual probability of occurrence of 49.7 mm of rain   |
|                  |                     |                  | in one hour                                           |                  | in one hour                                           |
+:=================+:====================+:=================+:======================================================+:=================+:======================================================+
| Historical       | 1961-2021           | 40.2             | 0.04                                                  | 49.7             | 0.01                                                  |
|                  | (reference)         |                  |                                                       |                  |                                                       |
+------------------+---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| SSP2-4.5         | 2041-2070           | 46.1             | 0.09                                                  | 57.0             | 0.03                                                  |
|                  +---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|                  | 2071-2100           | 48.3             | 0.11                                                  | 59.7             | 0.04                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| SSP3-7.0         | 2041-2070           | 46.5             | 0.09                                                  | 57.5             | 0.03                                                  |
|                  +---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|                  | 2071-2100           | 51.0             | 0.14                                                  | 62.9             | 0.05                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| SSP5-8.5         | 2041-2070           | 48.3             | 0.11                                                  | 59.7             | 0.04                                                  |
|                  +---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|                  | 2071-2100           | 54.8             | 0.18                                                  | 67.7             | 0.08                                                  |
+------------------+---------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

: 1-hour rainfall intensity (mm) with a 25-year return period
(sectors A, B and C) and 100-year return period (sector D) for the
reference period (1961--2021)^[The reference climate values come from the
     Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) curves from the Jean-Lesage
     Airport station in Québec City, produced by Environment and
     Climate Change Canada (ECCC). These values are based on the series
     for the period 1961--2021.] and the medium-term (2041--2070)
and long-term (2071--2100) future horizons under the SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0
and SSP5-8.5 scenarios^[These values were estimated for the grid point covering Québec
    City. The procedure used to estimate these values is described in
    Chapter 7 of @mailhot2024]. {#tbl-B6b}


+--------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Sector | Impacts                                              |
+========+======================================================+
| A, B   | Flooded basements and streets, damage to property    |
|        | (furniture, appliances, etc.) and buildings,         |
|        | disruption of socio-economic activities, cleanup     |
|        | work for the affected residents and for the city,    |
|        | unsanitary conditions, economic inequity between     |
|        | insured and uninsured people, stress and             |
|        | psychological distress, loss of property values      |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------+
| C      | Road traffic disruption, broken down vehicles,       |
|        | reduced accessibility for certain areas and for      |
|        | emergency services                                   |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------+
| D      | Accessibility issues, critical services interrupted  |
|        | or severely disrupted, areas cut off                 |
+--------+------------------------------------------------------+

: List of the main impacts of a pluvial flood for each sector. {#tbl-B6c}


+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Variable         | List of elements/criteria to consider                                     |
+:=================+:==========================================================================+
| Sensitivity      | * How have the elements/infrastructure in different sectors behaved in    |
|                  |   the past when faced with extreme rainfall?                              |
|                  | * Has the area experienced several floods in the past and, if so, how     |
|                  |   extreme was the associated rainfall?                                    |
|                  | * Are there any known or suspected structural issues for this sector,     |
|                  |   like undersized elements or low points?                                 |
|                  | * Is the existing infrastructure (e.g. the stormwater management system)  |
|                  |   often at full capacity?                                                 |
|                  | * How old is the sector and how outdated are the buildings and            |
|                  |   infrastructure there?                                                   |
|                  | * Are there many basins, basement apartments, negative-slope layouts or   |
|                  |   areas that encourage water to accumulate in certain places?             |
|                  | * Are there strategic systems (e.g. infrastructure, municipal buildings,  |
|                  |   hospitals, public services) or communities (e.g. vulnerable,            |
|                  |   economically disadvantaged populations) that would make a flood, even   |
|                  |   if very unlikely, have catastrophic consequences?                       |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Adaptive         | * What are the socio-economic and demographic profiles of the exposed     |
| capacity         |   sectors?                                                                |
|                  | * What is the fraction of tenants vs. owners?                             |
|                  | * To what extent do residents in the exposed sectors have the financial   |
|                  |   means to prepare (e.g. setting up temporary protective structures       |
|                  |   around houses), recover in the event of a disaster (e.g. insurance      |
|                  |   coverage) and implement certain adaptation measures (e.g.               |
|                  |   waterproofing buildings)?                                               |
|                  | * Is rehabilitation work on certain infrastructure (e.g. sewers, streets, |
|                  |   parks) planned in the short or medium term?                             |
|                  | * To what extent do the sector's configuration and types of occupancy     |
|                  |   offer adaptation options? Which ones?                                   |
+------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Non-exhaustive list of elements/criteria to be considered in order to establish the sensitivity and adaptive capacity^[Adaptive capacity also includes considerations on the
 municipality’s technical and financial capacity to adapt. These
 factors apply uniformly to the four sectors considered, but may vary
 significantly between municipalities, particularly between small and
 large municipalities.] ratings used to
estimate the vulnerability rating for the pluvial flood hazard. {#tbl-B6d}

::: {#tbl-B6e}
<table class="risk-matrix table">
<thead>
    <tr class="header">
        <th>Sector</th>
        <th>Exposed elements</th>
        <th>Sensitivity</th>
        <th>Adaptive capacity</th>
        <th>Vulnerability</th>
    </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <td>A</td>
        <td class="exposed-elements">Houses on AA Street between numbers A.1 and A.2; buildings A.1, small shopping centre to the south of the sector; row houses with negative-slope driveways on X Street</td>
        <td>Moderate (2)</td>
        <td>Moderate (2)</td>
        <td class="moderate">Moderate (4)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>B</td>
        <td class="exposed-elements">Basement apartments between numbers B.1 and B.7 on BB streets; medical clinic and fire station on Laflamme Street</td>
        <td>High (3)</td>
        <td>Low (3)</td>
        <td class="extreme">High (9)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>C</td>
        <td class="exposed-elements">Intersection of CC and DD boulevards and EE street</td>
        <td>High (3)</td>
        <td>High (1)</td>
        <td class="moderate">Moderate (3)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>D</td>
        <td class="exposed-elements">Several critical buildings and key infrastructure (e.g. hospitals, long-term care facilities) and several vulnerable populations</td>
        <td>High (3)</td>
        <td>Moderate (2)</td>
        <td class="extreme">High (6)</td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Vulnerability analysis detailing the exposed elements in each of the sectors (see @tbl-B6a) and the sensitivity, adaptive
capacity and vulnerability ratings assigned to them. The vulnerability values and scales^[Vulnerability scale: low (1 to 2), moderate (3 to 5), high (6 to 9).] are shown in @tbl-B6f.
:::


::: {#tbl-B6f}
<table class="risk-matrix table">
<thead>
    <tr class="header">
        <td colspan="3" rowspan="3"></td>
        <th colspan="3">Sensitivity</th>
    </tr>
    <tr class="header">
        <th>1</th>
        <th>2</th>
        <th>3</th>
    </tr>
    <tr class="header">
        <th>Low</th>
        <th>Moderate</th>
        <th>High</th>
    </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
    <tr>
        <th class="header" rowspan="3">Adaptive capacity</th>
        <th>1</th>
        <th>High</th>
        <td class="minor">1</td>
        <td class="minor">2</td>
        <td class="moderate">3</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>2</th>
        <th>Moderate</th>
        <td class="minor">2</td>
        <td class="moderate">4</td>
        <td class="extreme">6</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>3</th>
        <th>Low</th>
        <td class="moderate">3</td>
        <td class="extreme">6</td>
        <td class="extreme">9</td>
    </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Vulnerability matrix^[Vulnerability scale: low (1-2 in green), moderate (3-4 in yellow),
high (6-9 in red).], combining sensitivity and adaptive capacity^[Note that the sensitivity and adaptive capacity scales are inverted;
a low sensitivity value corresponds to a value of 1 while low adaptive
capacity is associated with a value of 3.].
:::


| Likelihood rating | Frequency | Annual probability of occurrence | Average number of years of occurrence over a 30-year period |
| ----------------- | --------- | -------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1                 | Very rare | 0.0 ≤ p ≤ 0.03                   | 0 ≤ N \< 1                                                  |
| 2                 | Infrequent | 0.03 \< p ≤ 0.07                | 1 ≤ N \< 2                                                  |
| 3                 | Moderately frequent | 0.07 \< p ≤ 0.15       | 2 ≤ N \< 5                                                  |
| 4                 | Frequent  | 0.15 \< p ≤ 0.3                  | 5 ≤ N ≤ 10                                                  |
| 5                 | Very frequent | 0.3 \< p ≤ 1                 | 15 \< N ≤ 30                                                |

: Likelihood scale^[The likelihood score of 1 is defined based on the annual maximum
 1-hour rainfall with a return period of 25 (p = 0.04) or 100 years
 (p = 0.01). Thus, the 4% annual probabilities of occurrence for
 sectors A, B and C, and 1% for sector D, are qualified as “very
 rare.” Ratings of 2 to 5 correspond to a progressive increase in
 the probability of occurrence of this rainfall.] based on the probabilities of occurrence of
the annual maximum 1-hour rainfall and the average number of years when
these events have occurred in a 30-year period. {#tbl-B6g}


::: {#tbl-B6h}
<table class="risk-matrix table">
    <thead>
        <tr class="header">
            <th rowspan="2">Sector</th>
            <th colspan="3">Reference period</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP2-4.5</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP3-7.0</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP5-8.5</th>
        </tr>
        <tr class="header">
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>A</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="minor">3</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="moderate">6</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="moderate">9</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="major">15</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>B</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="minor">4</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="moderate">8</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="major">12</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="extreme">20</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>C</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="negligible">2</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="minor">4</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="moderate">6</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="major">10</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>D</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="moderate">5</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="moderate">5</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="major">10</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="major">15</td>
        </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Risk analysis for the four sectors selected for the 2041--2170 horizon (L: Likelihood; C: Consequence; R: Risk). The risk
classification and the corresponding colour code are described in [Fact Sheet @sec-B3] (TODO: je pense que c'est @tbl-B5).
:::

::: {#tbl-B6i}
<table class="risk-matrix table">
    <thead>
        <tr class="header">
            <th rowspan="2">Sector</th>
            <th colspan="3">Reference period</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP2-4.5</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP3-7.0</th>
            <th colspan="3">SSP5-8.5</th>
        </tr>
        <tr class="header">
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
            <th>L</th>
            <th>C</th>
            <th>R</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>A</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="minor">3</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="moderate">9</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="major">12</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td class="major">15</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>B</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="minor">4</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="major">12</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="major">16</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td class="extreme">20</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>C</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="negligible">2</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="moderate">6</td>
            <td>4</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="moderate">8</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>2</td>
            <td class="major">10</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>D</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="moderate">5</td>
            <td>1</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="moderate">5</td>
            <td>3</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="major">15</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td>5</td>
            <td class="extreme">25</td>
        </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Risk analysis for the four sectors selected for the 2071--2100 horizon (L: Likelihood; C: Consequence; R: Risk). The risk
classification and the corresponding colour code are described in [Fact Sheet @sec-B3] (TODO: je pense que c'est @tbl-B5).
:::

+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Type of measure             | Suitability and feasibility criteria                        | Comments                                                    |
+:============================+:============================================================+:============================================================+
| Improvement,                | * Parts of systems that are obsolete or deemed problematic  | * Effective measures for medium and heavy rainfall          |
| reconfiguration,            | * Planned street redevelopment and system improvement       | * Detailed characterization and diagnosis of existing       |
| rehabilitation of streets   | * Addition of retention capacity (basin, conduits, etc.)    |   essential systems                                         |
| and system[^2]              | * Potential for the development of temporary retention      | * Make the most of planned work to maximize adaptation      |
|                             |   areas (e.g. parks, sports grounds, "water squares")       | * Ensure water retention structures and temporary retention |
|                             |                                                             |   zones are designed to manage more extreme rainfall events |
|                             |                                                             | * Must be included in the asset management plan             |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Source inspection and       | * Significant input of runoff and potential to reduce or    | * Measures to reduce water inputs into the system           |
| green infrastructure        |   redirect runoff to infiltration or storage areas (e.g.    | * Includes measures such as disconnecting eavestroughs,     |
|                             |   disconnecting eavestroughs or redirecting runoff to       |   green (or planted) infrastructure                         |
|                             |   infiltration areas)                                       | * Effective for low- and medium-intensity rainfall          |
|                             | * Detailed review of sectors to identify possible sites     | * Some of these measures have social acceptability issues   |
|                             |   for implementing a significant number of these measures   | * Commitment and cost assessment are important to ensure    |
|                             |                                                             |   adequate long-term maintenance of these structures        |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Land use planning           | * Presence of numerous basins and low points[^3] and        | * Land use planning measures to reduce water inputs into    |
|                             |   potential to reduce or redirect water from upstream areas |   the system (e.g. replacing impermeable surfaces with      |
|                             | * Possibility of reducing impermeable surfaces (e.g.        |   permeable ones, maintenance of wetlands, parks and green  |
|                             |   reduction of street width, replacing impermeable surfaces |   spaces in urban settings)                                 |
|                             |   with permeable ones)                                      | * Measures included in the sectors' urban planning and      |
|                             |                                                             |   redevelopment plans                                       |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Regulation, taxation,       | * Stricter by-laws (e.g. restrictions on basement           | * Identify regulatory and fiscal methods to encourage       |
| governance and financing    |   apartments or on construction and rebuilding in certain   |   residents and institutions to adopt behaviours or         |
|                             |   areas)                                                    |   implement certain measures (reduction of impermeable      |
|                             | * Circumscribe water inputs from new developments and those |   surfaces, implementation of green infrastructure,         |
|                             |   undergoing rehabilitation                                 |   waterproofing, etc.)                                      |
|                             | * Encourage (or force) commercial, institutional and        | * Major social acceptability issues                         |
|                             |   industrial organizations to reduce their "stormwater      | * Assessment of the socio-economic impacts of any new       |
|                             |   footprint"                                                |   regulation or by-law                                      |
|                             | * Strengthening and enforcing by-laws on the control of     | * Consider new ways to share stormwater management          |
|                             |   runoff from construction sites                            |   responsibilities and governance                           |
|                             | * Financial incentives to promote adaptation (e.g. rain     |                                                             |
|                             |   garden development, tree planting)                        |                                                             |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prevention and emergency    | * Identify failures in past prevention and emergency        | * Major communications and public consultation issues       |
| measures                    |   responses and possible ways to improve (e.g. improving    | * Ask other municipalities about their approach to          |
|                             |   communications between municipal services or with the     |   emergency situations                                      |
|                             |   public)                                                   | * Organize mechanisms for mutual assistance between         |
|                             | * Raising public awareness in certain sectors so that       |   neighbouring municipalities                               |
|                             |   residents consider certain options (e.g. waterproofing    | * Maximize coordination with various government bodies      |
|                             |   buildings, disconnecting eavestroughs, inspecting         |   and public services (e.g. Ministère de la Sécurité        |
|                             |   backflow preventers, improving drainage)                  |   Publique, Hydro-Québec)                                   |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
| Catastrophic events[^4]     | * Measures to limit the impacts if the capacities of the    | * Consider a very high climate threshold associated with    |
|                             |   existing structures are significantly exceeded (where     |   a rare flood whose consequences would be catastrophic     |
|                             |   will the water go and how can it be redirected to         | * For analysis purposes, look at the impacts of a major     |
|                             |   lower-risk areas?)                                        |   rain event that has struck another municipality           |
|                             | * Planning for emergency measures in the event of a         | * Analyze the flooding following such an event              |
|                             |   catastrophic situation (e.g. access to the most impacted  | * List of impacts (affected neighbourhoods and streets,     |
|                             |   areas by emergency services)                              |   displaced population)                                     |
|                             | * Plan for evacuations in the event of an emergency         | * List of essential services disrupted (e.g. power outage,  |
|                             | * Identify sites where evacuees can take refuge or be       |   inability of emergency services to respond)               |
|                             |   relocated in the short and medium term                    | * List possible impact chains, also called "domino effects" |
|                             | * Review and simplify post-event financial aid and          |   (e.g. torrential rain → system overload → discharge of    |
|                             |   assistance processes                                      |   wastewater into receiving environment → contamination of  |
|                             |                                                             |   drinking water sources)[^5]                               |
+-----------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+

: Types of possible measures, their suitability and feasibility criteria, and the possible sectors for their implementation^[This list is not exhaustive. Several documents can be consulted on this subject. For more details, readers can consult @mddelcc2017.]. {#tbl-B6j}

[^2]: The capacities of the structures will have to be adapted in keeping with the increases in rainfall shown in Table B.6b. A map of the
      basins and low points could prove very useful. The upstream areas and the directions of surface flows towards these points would also
      be indicated.

[^3]: A map of the basins and low points could prove very useful. The upstream areas and the directions of surface flows towards these points would also be indicated.

[^4]: The aim here is to examine what would happen if an exceptional catastrophic event were to strike the municipality and what measures
      should be put in place to improve risk management in a situation where the capacities of the infrastructure in place or its tolerance
      thresholds are exceeded. This "theoretical" exercise is essential because unprecedented events are likely to occur in the context of
      climate change.

[^5]: Appendix G of @ouranos2024 discusses this issue and gives various examples of possible impact chains for different hazards.


+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Area           | Measures                                                                 | Deliverables and performance indicators                          |
+================+:=========================================================================+:=================================================================+
| Municipality   | * Improve coordination between different municipal departments by        | * Conduct a detailed analysis of past floods and a diagnosis of  |
|                |   setting up a climate change adaptation coordination office[^k3]        |   the causes of the failures observed and possible solutions     |
|                | * Define the roles, powers and responsibilities of the climate change    | * Climate change adaptation plan                                 |
|                |   adaptation coordination office                                         | * Relevant information and resources for implementing the        |
|                | * Review municipal governance to grant the climate change adaptation     |   adaptation plan (e.g. historical weather data, basin map,      |
|                |   coordination office the powers it needs                                |   infrastructure data, land use maps)                            |
|                | * Define the office's mandates (coordination of CC adaptation            | * Indicators: compliance with deadlines in the climate change    |
|                |   activities, development and implementation of an adaptation plan,      |   adaptation coordination office's work, commitment level of     |
|                |   coordination between departments in implementing measures, etc.)       |   the various departments to CC adaptation                       |
|                | * Produce an adaptation plan                                             |                                                                  |
|                | * Consider regulatory measures or financial incentives (e.g.             |                                                                  |
|                |   incentives for the inspection of backflow preventers, restriction      |                                                                  |
|                |   on basement apartments or on construction and rebuilding in            |                                                                  |
|                |   certain areas)                                                         |                                                                  |
|                | * Develop a consultation strategy and a communication plan for the       |                                                                  |
|                |   public and for institutions                                            |                                                                  |
+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sector A       | * Several problematic negative slopes and sections of streets in         | * List of measures selected and detailed plan for their          |
|                |   basins: local solutions to redirect runoff water and temporarily       |   implementation                                                 |
|                |   store surface water                                                    | * Indicators for monitoring the implementation of the measures   |
|                | * Development of green infrastructure                                    |   (e.g. number of houses visited)                                |
|                | * Implementation of a backflow prevention valve inspection program       | * Document the impacts of all rainfall events, even minor ones   |
|                |   and awareness-raising on stormwater issues (e.g. the                   |                                                                  |
|                |   vulnerabilities of basements)                                          |                                                                  |
+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sector B       | * In certain areas of the sector, integrate improvements to increase     | * List of measures selected and detailed plan for their          |
|                |   capacity and reconfigure surface runoff into the rehabilitation        |   implementation                                                 |
|                |   work to separate the combined system                                   | * Indicators for monitoring the implementation of the measures   |
|                | * Take advantage of all rehabilitation or development work to include    |   (e.g. number of houses visited)                                |
|                |   measures to reduce impermeable surfaces (e.g. reduction in street      | * Document the impacts of all rainfall events, even minor ones   |
|                |   width, addition of permeable surfaces) or to reduce water              |                                                                  |
|                |   contributions to the system (e.g. surface or underground storage)      |                                                                  |
|                | * Develop a disaster response plan adapted to the realities of this      |                                                                  |
|                |   sector (e.g. working in collaboration with community organizations     |                                                                  |
|                |   to identify the most vulnerable individuals or families)               |                                                                  |
+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sector C       | * Addition of a retention structure and increase in collector capacity   | * List of measures selected and detailed plan for their          |
|                | * Addition of a signalling system to notify motorists that a section     |   implementation                                                 |
|                |   of a road is flooded                                                   | * Indicators for monitoring the implementation of the measures   |
|                | * Adapt emergency response plans to redirect emergency vehicles in       |   (e.g. number of houses visited)                                |
|                |   the event of flooding in these sections                                | * Document the impacts of all rainfall events, even minor ones   |
+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sector D       | * Determine the extent of the areas exposed to flooding                  | * Determine the extent of the areas exposed to flooding          |
|                | * Develop an emergency response and evacuation plan for this sector      | * Establish a list of inaccessible services                      |
|                |   in the event of flooding                                               | * Document the possible impact chains in the event of flooding   |
|                | * Consider whether certain adjustments could reduce the impacts          |   in this sector                                                 |
+----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Table B.6k. List of measures chosen at the municipal level and for each sectors with the deliverables to be produced and the performance
indicators selected^[This list is hypothetical.]. {#tbl-B6k}

[^k3]: In the case of a small municipality, this role could be assumed by an individual. In the case of very small municipalities, this type of
      resource could be allocated by higher levels of government.





