# Floods, high water levels and climate change: An overview {#sec-C1}

Climate change will lead to some significant variations in several
meteorological variables that are central in hydrology. These variations
will have major consequences on floods, whether they are fluvial
(river-related), pluvial (rain-fed), coastal, or caused by ice break-ups
and ice jams. It seems clear that the increase in intense rainfall in
the summer and fall will lead to more frequent and significant pluvial
flooding in urban areas due to the inability of current systems to
evacuate these large volumes of water (see [Fact Sheet @sec-C3]). The
situation is more complex for fluvial flooding and coastal submergence,
where several factors come into play^[ The findings in this fact sheet are
drawn from the Hydroclimatic Atlas of Southern Québec (see [Fact Sheet @sec-C2]) and from @sharma2021.]. The fact sheets in
Module C focus more specifically on fluvial and pluvial flooding.

The highest water level of the year generally occurs in the spring in
the large watersheds of Quebec and Canada, and is known as the spring
freshet. The magnitude of the spring freshet depends on the amount of
snow that accumulated during the winter (the snowpack), the speed at
which this snow melts, and the occurrence of rain-on-snow episodes
during the melting period. However, current projections indicate an
increase in total precipitation during the winter accompanied by a
marked increase in temperatures during the same season. This rise in
temperatures means that episodes of melting and rain will be more
frequent in the winter. The impact on the snowpack available at the time
of melting is therefore very uncertain, since part of the additional
winter precipitation could be in liquid form. Similarly, an increase in
average temperatures could result in more frequent and intense
rain-on-snow episodes in spring. The cumulative impact of these factors
on the spring freshet is therefore very uncertain and will depend on the
geographical location of the watershed, its altitude, its surface area
and some of its physiographic characteristics. It’s likely that the
spring freshet in basins located further north will increase due to an
increase in the snowpack available for melting, while the opposite
situation could occur for basins located further south, where
alternating periods of snow accumulation and thawing will lead to a
decrease in the snowpack in the spring. In every case, the spring
freshet will be earlier.

The intensification of summer and autumn rainfall will have major
impacts on water levels, particularly for small watersheds where heavy
rain can fall across the entire watershed and where concentration times
are shorter. The most extreme high water events will be the most
impacted, because the rainfall will also be more extreme and will
generate greater volumes of runoff. The effect on larger watersheds is
more uncertain and will depend on the future changes in soil moisture
conditions.

In sum, the impacts of climate change on flood patterns depend on many
factors, several of which are still poorly or incompletely represented
by the models. Overall, there could be an increase in the occurrence of
annual maximum floods in the summer or fall, to the detriment of the
spring freshet, in several small watersheds located further south.
Similarly, the most significant high water events are likely to be the
most impacted by climate change. These high water events will be more
sudden and will be associated with convective systems or extratropical
storms that end their journey in Canada. It’s essential to understand
that the flooding of the future also depends significantly on future
changes in land use in these watersheds.

