# Stormwater management and climate change {#sec-C3}

Extreme rainfall will be strongly affected by climate change (see [Fact
Sheet @sec-A3] for a definition of extreme rainfall). Considering that many
hydraulic structures that are currently in place were sized in keeping
with historical extreme rainfall, a change in the intensity and
frequency of rainfall will have major consequences, particularly for
stormwater management in urban areas.

Although the amplitude of the projected variations remains uncertain and
depends on the climate model, there is consensus that there is a signal
indicating more intense extreme rainfall [@bush2019]. This
intensification will likely be more serious the shorter and more extreme
the rain event is. We will see an increase in the frequency and
intensity of extreme rainfall, as well as the occurrence of
unprecedented rainfall events. The capacity of existing structures will
be exceeded more often and will lead to major consequences. Several rain
events that have hit urban areas in recent years are an illustration of
this.

It’s essential to take measures to reduce the risk associated with this
type of hazard in urban environments [@ouranos2024; melccfp2024-eau].
These may include:
(1) converting impermeable surfaces into permeable ones (e.g. permeable
paving); (2) redirecting runoff from impermeable surfaces to facilities
for infiltration or temporary storage (e.g. green infrastructure); and
(3) reviewing the design criteria of certain structures such as sewage
systems, basins and culverts in order to increase their capacity.
However, these measures must be implemented on a large scale to be
effective, which can only be done as rehabilitation work is carried out
on the systems and urban areas. They will improve resilience in the case
of low or moderate intensity rainfall, but their effectiveness will be
limited in the face of extreme rainfall that saturates the soil, causes
water accumulation and system backups, and floods certain areas.

Other measures should be considered for the most extreme rainfall. It’s
also important to consider what will happen when the capacity of the
structures is exceeded and to look at the routes that this excess water
will follow in order to take the right actions to deal with these
exceptional situations. One example is to make use of strategically
placed public spaces where this excess water can be directed and
temporarily stored. From there, the water can then be infiltrated or
redirected to the system. A multifunctional floodable square known as a
“water square” like Place des Fleurs de Macadam in Montréal is an
example of this (@fig-C3). It is a floodable public space that
collects runoff water during major rainfall events. In the absence of
precipitation, it’s accessible to the public.

![Floodable multifunctional square (water square) at Place des
Fleurs de Macadam in Montréal (image from the Ville de Montréal
website).](./media/C3.png){#fig-C3}

